\subsubsection{New Reference: Variable Star Classification with CNN-LSTM}

Becker et al.\ (2021) developed a hybrid CNN-LSTM architecture for classifying variable star light curves from the Optical Gravitational Lensing Experiment (OGLE) and Catalina Real-Time Transient Survey (CRTS), achieving 92-95\% accuracy across eclipsing binaries, RR Lyrae, Cepheids, and long-period variables \cite{Becker2021variablestars}. Their work directly addresses the challenge of classifying astronomical time series with irregular sampling and heterogeneous noise characteristics---precisely the challenges faced in exoplanet transit detection.

\textbf{Architecture and Design Rationale.} The hybrid combines 1D convolutional layers (kernel sizes 3, 5, and 7) with stacked LSTM layers in a sequential pipeline. The CNN component extracts local morphological features---transit shape, ingress/egress profiles, eclipse symmetry---through learned convolutional filters. Max pooling between convolutional blocks reduces sequence length from thousands of points to hundreds, improving computational efficiency while preserving salient features. The LSTM component then processes these compressed representations to capture long-range temporal dependencies including periodicity patterns, phase relationships between primary and secondary eclipses, and gradual brightness variations characteristic of pulsating stars.

The authors experimented with several architectural variants: CNN-only, LSTM-only, and the hybrid CNN-LSTM. The hybrid consistently outperformed single-architecture approaches by 5-8\% in classification accuracy, demonstrating that local feature extraction and sequential modeling provide complementary information. This finding directly informs my decision to use bidirectional LSTMs, which similarly combine forward and backward temporal context.

\textbf{Class Imbalance Handling.} Their dataset exhibited 10-20$\times$ class imbalance between common variable types (eclipsing binaries) and rare categories (anomalous Cepheids). They addressed this through stratified mini-batch sampling---ensuring each training batch contained representatives from all classes---combined with inverse-frequency class weights in the cross-entropy loss function. The weighted loss assigns higher penalties to misclassifying rare classes, preventing the model from simply predicting the majority class. This is precisely the strategy I implement with pos\_weight = 3.367 (later updated to 7.41 for Sector 1 data) to handle the 11.7\% positive class ratio in transit detection.

\textbf{Key Findings and Implications.} The hybrid achieved 92-95\% accuracy using raw photometric time series without hand-engineered period or amplitude features. This end-to-end learning approach validates my architectural choice to feed normalized flux windows directly into the BiLSTM rather than computing intermediate representations. The authors also demonstrated that their model generalized across OGLE and CRTS surveys despite different cadences, photometric systems, and noise characteristics---providing evidence that deep learning can learn mission-agnostic astronomical patterns.

\textbf{Relevance to My Implementation.} Two key lessons emerge: (1) raw time-series input works effectively, eliminating potential information loss from aggressive feature engineering; (2) weighted loss successfully handles severe class imbalance while maintaining high accuracy on minority classes. The hybrid architecture's success also motivates future work exploring CNN preprocessing before my BiLSTM, though the current architecture already achieves competitive results.

\subsubsection{New Reference: Machine Learning for Ground-Based Transit Surveys}

Schanche et al.\ (2019) developed an automated vetting pipeline for transit candidates from the Wide Angle Search for Planets (WASP) ground-based survey, achieving approximately 90\% correct identification of genuine planetary transits versus false positives \cite{Schanche2019mlexoplanet}. Ground-based surveys face substantially greater noise challenges than space-based missions due to atmospheric scintillation, weather interruptions, and day/night observing gaps, making their results particularly encouraging for space-based applications.

\textbf{The False Positive Problem.} A central challenge in transit detection is distinguishing genuine planetary transits from astrophysical false positives. Eclipsing binary stars produce transit-like dips but with several distinguishing characteristics: deeper eclipses (typically 1-50\% versus 0.01-1\% for planets), longer durations relative to orbital period, V-shaped rather than U-shaped profiles due to limb darkening effects, and often visible secondary eclipses when the smaller star passes behind the larger. Background eclipsing binaries---unrelated binary systems whose light contaminates the target aperture---are particularly insidious because their diluted signals can mimic planetary transit depths. Schanche et al.\ explicitly trained their classifiers to distinguish these scenarios.

\textbf{Methodology and Classifier Comparison.} The authors trained both Random Forest ensemble classifiers and convolutional neural networks on light curves containing four categories: confirmed planetary transits, eclipsing binaries (both foreground and background), intrinsic variable stars, and non-periodic systematic artifacts. Individual classifiers achieved 85-88\% accuracy but produced substantial false positive rates on challenging cases where transit-like signals had ambiguous characteristics. However, ensemble voting---combining predictions from multiple classifiers trained on different feature subsets---reduced errors by 15-20\%, achieving the final 90\% accuracy.

This ensemble finding resonates strongly with my clustering strategy. Rather than forcing a single model to handle all stellar variability types, K-means clustering partitions the data into homogeneous subgroups, and cluster embeddings allow the BiLSTM to specialize its learned representations for each group. The philosophical parallel is clear: both approaches recognize that a single classifier struggles with heterogeneous data, and stratification (whether through explicit ensembles or learned embeddings) improves performance.

\textbf{Discriminating Features.} The authors identified transit depth and duration as the two most important features for distinguishing planets from eclipsing binaries, with depth providing 3$\times$ more discriminative power than the next most important feature. Planets produce shallow transits (typically 0.01-1\% flux decrease) while binaries produce deeper eclipses. Transit duration relative to orbital period also differs: planetary transits last 1-5 hours while binary eclipses often span 5-15\% of the orbital period. These findings directly motivate my inclusion of BLS-derived depth and duration features in the clustering step, ensuring windows are grouped by these physically meaningful characteristics.

\textbf{Relevance and Performance Implications.} Ground-based surveys operate under conditions far noisier than space-based missions. Atmospheric turbulence introduces correlated noise, clouds create data gaps, and limited nightly observing windows reduce phase coverage. If machine learning achieves 90\% accuracy under these challenging conditions, my BiLSTM with cluster embeddings operating on cleaner TESS space photometry should achieve comparable or superior results. The emphasis on depth and duration as primary discriminators validates my BLS-feature-based clustering approach, confirming that these physically motivated features capture the essential differences between planet and non-planet signals.

\subsubsection{New Reference: Feature-Based Detection with Gradient Boosting}

Malik et al.\ (2022) took a fundamentally different approach to exoplanet detection: rather than feeding raw light curves into neural networks, they extracted 789 statistical features using the TSFRESH automated feature extraction library and trained a LightGBM gradient boosting classifier, achieving AUC 0.948 and recall 0.96 on Kepler data \cite{Malik2022exoplanetdetection}. This feature-based approach provides an important benchmark against which neural network methods must justify their added complexity.

\textbf{Feature Engineering with TSFRESH.} The Time Series Feature Extraction based on Scalable Hypothesis tests (TSFRESH) library automatically computes a comprehensive set of time series descriptors without requiring domain expertise. The 789 features span multiple categories: basic statistics (mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis), autocorrelation at various lags capturing periodicity, spectral properties from Fourier decomposition, entropy measures quantifying signal complexity, and change-point statistics identifying discontinuities. This exhaustive feature set describes the shape, periodicity, and statistical properties of each light curve without requiring the researcher to manually engineer representations.

The authors applied feature selection using a combination of statistical significance tests and recursive feature elimination, ultimately identifying approximately 150 features as most predictive. Top-ranked features included autocorrelation at lags corresponding to orbital periods, variance ratios between in-transit and out-of-transit segments, and spectral power at transit-related frequencies. Interestingly, many of these selected features correspond to the same physical information captured by BLS analysis---periodicity, transit depth, and duration---validating the domain-specific features I use for clustering.

\textbf{LightGBM Training and Results.} LightGBM, a gradient boosting framework optimized for speed and memory efficiency, constructs an ensemble of decision trees where each subsequent tree corrects errors made by previous trees. The authors trained on Kepler confirmed planets (positive examples) and a carefully curated set of non-planet signals including eclipsing binaries, variable stars, and systematic artifacts (negative examples). Five-fold cross-validation produced remarkably consistent results: AUC 0.948 $\pm$ 0.012, precision 0.91, recall 0.96.

The 0.96 recall indicates the classifier correctly identified 96\% of genuine planetary signals---missing only 4\% of planets in the dataset. The 0.948 AUC means that a randomly selected planet signal would be ranked above a randomly selected non-planet 94.8\% of the time. These results establish a concrete performance target that any neural network approach must meet or exceed to justify its additional architectural complexity.

\textbf{Benchmark Implications for Neural Networks.} Malik et al.'s results pose a critical question: if feature engineering followed by gradient boosting achieves AUC 0.948, what do neural networks offer? The answer lies in representation learning. Gradient boosting treats each of the 789 features independently, learning optimal decision boundaries in feature space but unable to capture complex interactions between sequential elements. My BiLSTM learns temporal patterns directly from raw flux---the characteristic U-shaped transit profile, the relationship between ingress and egress phases, subtle asymmetries indicating grazing transits---that feature-based methods cannot represent.

The architectural comparison reveals complementary strengths: feature-based methods excel when domain knowledge can be encoded into explicit features, while neural networks excel at discovering patterns that resist manual specification. My approach combines both philosophies: explicit BLS features (period, depth, duration) inform clustering, while the BiLSTM learns implicit temporal representations within each cluster. This hybrid strategy aims to capture the best of both worlds.

\textbf{Target Setting.} Malik et al.'s 0.948 AUC establishes the benchmark my BiLSTM must approach. Current results (AUC 0.893 on TESS Sector 1 test data) fall short of this target, but several factors complicate direct comparison: different datasets (Kepler versus TESS), different class distributions (their balanced sampling versus my 11.7\% positive rate), and different evaluation protocols. Nevertheless, closing the gap to 0.948 AUC remains a concrete goal for future optimization.
